+++
date = "2019-03-27T11:00:00Z"
title = "DotGo 2019 - Paris"
description = "a dev from the trenches"
tags = [ "dev", "go", "conferences" ]
categories = [ "dev", "go", "conferences", "dotgo" ]
slug = "dotgo-2019"
+++

![](https://www.dotgo.eu/static/images/logo-dotgo.png)

> "To like many people spontaneously and without effort is perhaps the greatest
of all sources of personal happiness." --- Bertrand Russell

---

## Eurostar 🚅🇪🇺⭐️

The adventure begins at St. Pancras train station, where I randomly bump into
[Kat](https://twitter.com/kasiazien): what a nice coincidence to start!

After some deep conversations that could have led us to designing a decision
tree for ranking pastries (almond vs. choc/hazelnut croissant vs. pain au
chocolat), the platform was announced and Kat and myself boarded, respectively,
carriage 4 - seat 4, and carriage 5 - seat 67. Here 👇 is a thread should you
want to know more.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en-gb"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Just
as I was about to post a grumpy comment about the Eurostar, I bump into <a
href="https://twitter.com/londongopher_?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@londongopher_</a>
and all is good in the world again! 😁 <a
href="https://twitter.com/dotGoEu?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@dotGoEu</a> here we
come! 🕺🏻</p>&mdash; Kat Zień (@kasiazien) <a
href="https://twitter.com/kasiazien/status/1109777949744607233?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">24
March 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

A rather seamless journey brought us to Paris, Gare du Nord 🎉. It didn't take
us long to get to the Hotel where we had an excellent reception by the [Happy
Culture](https://twitter.com/_HappyCulture) hotels staff.

---

## Paris Gophers 🇫🇷

While Kat was reviewing the slides, a message comes from
[Roberto](https://twitter.com/empijei) which could be summarised with _"does
anyone want to get a drink?"_. So, while Kat decided to get ready for the
speakers dinner, myself and Roberto headed to the [10th
arrondissement](https://goo.gl/maps/YbpY6i5KhrC2) where the venue that would
host the ["Bring the cool back in the
cloud"](https://www.meetup.com/Golang-Paris/events/259677022/) was.

It was great to hang out with the Paris Go community; very interesting lightning
talks in a welcoming venue with top notch organic blanche beer 🍻 to quench our
thirst, and french baguette 🥖, cheese 🧀 and jam to keep us well nourished.

A collection of moments from the night is 👇

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">A few
tweets from the ⚡️ “Golang Paris - pre conference meetup” 🇫🇷<a
href="https://t.co/xoDTDMlva3">https://t.co/xoDTDMlva3</a><br>Thanks to <a
href="https://twitter.com/GolangParis?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@GolangParis</a> for
organising this awesome pre-conference event! Really enjoyed meeting old and new
friends!</p>&mdash; Antonio Troina 🇬🇧 (@londongopher\_) <a
href="https://twitter.com/londongopher_/status/1110575028406534145?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
26, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> 

---  

## dotGo - Paris Theatre 🥰

The venue is just beautiful, one of my favourites, if not my favourite so far.
It has hosted us for a few years, and hopefully will continue doing so.

{{< figure src="../../images/dotGo-2019/theatre.jpg" class="medium" >}}

I really like the dotGo format of a **single track conference**, with "ted-like"
talks and quite **long breaks** to allow people to socialise without having to
keep an eye on the watch not to miss the next talk. In addition to this, the
organisers kindly encouraged the audience **not to use any laptop - and ideally
any phone -** and just enjoy the talks: this is made easier by long breaks
between the talk sessions, as everyone has time to catch up with their digital
alter-ego during the break, and enjoy the conference and the talks the rest of
the time.

Another interesting aspect of the conference is that the attendees will only
know which speakers will take part to the event, but nothing about their talks.
It might sound weird, but it feels, somewhat, right.

But moving on: breakfast time looked already quite busy, and so did the theatre
at the beginning of the conference.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">It’s
breakfast time at ⁦<a
href="https://twitter.com/dotGoEu?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@dotGoEu</a>⁩ ! 🥐 ☕️ 🍌
<a href="https://t.co/VLeoQKRsGv">pic.twitter.com/VLeoQKRsGv</a></p>&mdash;
Antonio Troina 🇬🇧 (@londongopher\_) <a
href="https://twitter.com/londongopher_/status/1110103611428794368?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">⁦<a
href="https://twitter.com/dotGoEu?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@dotGoEu</a>⁩ will start
in a few minutes! 💪 Everyone is waiting for the one and only ⁦<a
href="https://twitter.com/davecheney?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@davecheney</a>⁩ to
kick off the show! <a
href="https://t.co/0q6lU8Btpi">pic.twitter.com/0q6lU8Btpi</a></p>&mdash; Antonio
Troina 🇬🇧 (@londongopher\_) <a
href="https://twitter.com/londongopher_/status/1110112067086880768?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

---

## The talks 🗣

Due to **Eurostar** panic I'm utterly gutted I missed the last two talks of the
day.

Follows a **brief summary** of what I attended and - where possible - some
links: I'm sure videos will be published at some point in the future by the
organisers.

### Optimizing Go code without a blindfold ([Daniel Martí](https://twitter.com/mvdan_))
[[slides]](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1cUVp8OuzOW4lzClsiptgacW7nSFkcgvhLRVAOgVPpYg/edit#slide=id.g54b9fd6434_0_52)

I know Daniel from the [London Gophers](https://twitter.com/londongophers)
meetup, as he's been one of the most active gophers! A great person who in my
opinion embodies the values of a community member and contributor. I got used to
always expect something insightful from his talks, and I never get disappointed,
including this time.

Daniel presented in his usual very informal and pragmatic style how important it
is to be rigorous when it comes to measuring performances (if those _really_
matter!), and take into consideration all the possible side effects and
variables that could play a role in the process. He gave a few concrete
suggestions on the steps that should be considered when measuring performances
of a program, and gave a few insights on how the compiler optimises some code
(and how **it's getting better in doing so!**) if you know the tricks.

That day I learnt:
```go
// replace a map
m = make(map[string]string)

// clear a map; faster since Go 1.11!
for k := range m {
	delete(m, k)
}
```

> Hashtag **#TIL** (that day I learnt...)

### How do you structure your Go apps? ([Kat Zień](https://twitter.com/kasiazien))
[[slides]](https://github.com/katzien/talks/blob/master/how-do-you-structure-your-apps/dotgo-2019-03-25/slides.pdf)

As Daniel, I know Kat from our [London
Gophers](https://twitter.com/londongophers) meet-up, of which she happens to be
also co-organiser. It's always great to hear from her about software design and
follow her research through the history of design patterns and how they could be
implemented without giving up on the "idiomatic Go" approach.

Kat went through the discovery and re-discovery of the
hex/onion/ports-and-adapters pattern, discussing the advantages with a focus on
the maintainability of a system, getting there through different testing
approaches (and how they relate to each part of the hexagon). 

Takeaways: start simple, evolve over time, and be like water.

> Hashtag **#organisedsimplicity**

### Better x86 assembly generation with Go ([Michael McLoughlin](https://twitter.com/mbmcloughlin))
[[slides]](https://speakerdeck.com/mmcloughlin/better-x86-assembly-generation-with-go)

This was the first time I listened to a talk by Michael. After the first few
slides where I felt a bit lost not having used assembly in Go, and expecting
something somehow inaccessible, I was positively surprised by realising that it
all made sense! Michael explained how the Go standard library still relies on
Assembly (especially some packages, like `crypto`), and suggested a solution to
the problem he identified, which is mostly the maintainability of the Assembly
code.

He recognised that sometimes using Assembly will make sense, but at the same
time it would be great to have a way to generate robust Assembly with Go itself,
which is why he came up with the idea of
"[Avo](https://github.com/mmcloughlin/avo)" (loved the pun *"I also Avo a logo
for it!"*).

> Hashtag **#baremetal🤘**

### ⚡️Distroless docker image ([Joan López de la Franca](https://twitter.com/joanjan14/))

This was the first of a series of lightning talks after lunch.

Joan gave us a brief introduction on Docker images/containers, and introduced
the audience to the concept of a "distroless" docker image (more details
[here](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless)) that can be used to
prevent access to the container via bash (as a distroless image doesn't have
shell or any package manager).

> Hashtag **#braceyourself**

### ⚡️ Neural networks made easy ([Olivier Wulveryck](https://twitter.com/owulveryck))
[[slides]](https://speakerdeck.com/owulveryck/onnx-go-neural-networks-made-easy)

Nice introduction on how developers can use neural networks by writing Go.
Olivier introduced us to the ONNX open format and the onnx-go implementation.

> Hashtag **#🧠**

### ⚡️ TensorFlow and Go ([Natalie Pistunovich](https://twitter.com/NataliePis))
[[slides coming soon]](https://github.com/pisush)

I met Natalie a few times at previous Go conferences, I believe the first time
was Fosdem a few years ago, and then of course in Iceland as she's the organiser
of the wonderful GopherCon Europe ([which this year will be in
Tenerife](https://www.gophercon.es)).

Now, here's the gist: she managed to explain me what Tensorflow is, why should I
care, and how can I start, and all this in 5 minutes.

I'm not going to lie, I've heard about tensorflow in the past, I knew what it's
used for (kind of), but this talk was, in its simplicity, just perfect. After
the talk I felt like this:

![](https://media.giphy.com/media/QmDiSBMQPC0CYqZD4z/giphy.gif)

So, thank you Natalie 🙏

> Hashtag **#crystalclear**

### ⚡️ The monsters inside the `sync.Locker` 🔒 ([Roberto Clapis](https://twitter.com/empijei))
[[slides]](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1tyLYa5ucxVx-_h-GRaHYKzhQBaCTBP4B-Lai3wkmj6A/edit#slide=id.p)

I met Roberto at GopherCon UK in 2018 (check out his [talk about
concurrency](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4CrL3Ygh7S0)!), and ever since a
good pint has become a regular habit when we we get a chance to get one!

In his lightning talk this time Roberto explored with the audience the internals
of mutexes explaining how they make use of the `atomic` package, and why it's
important not to mess with it! Mutexes in Go take care of using atomics in a
concurrently safe way, which is not necessarily what you might end up doing
should you decide to do it yourself! So don't!

> Hashtag **[#canttouchthis!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=otCpCn0l4Wo)**

### ⚡️ Swimming Pool Semaphores 🚦 ([Valentin Deleplace](https://twitter.com/val_deleplace))
[[slides]](http://35.224.214.137:5050/)

This is one of those talks that by taking advantage of some basic visualisation
techniques can clarify some well known concurrency patterns way better than
anything else. It's a talk about how to implement semaphores by using the
analogy of a swimming pool. I'd recommend this presentation over a bunch of
books if you're short on time!

Great idea, simple implementation, and slides are rendering real Go code... 😱

> Hashtag **#humanconcurrency**

### Constant time ⏲ ([Dave Cheney](https://twitter.com/davecheney))
[slides coming soon]

Dave is a well known member of our community, we recently had the pleasure to
host him at LondonGophers where he gave a talk titled [Absolute Unit
(Test)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKe5sX1dZ0k), and for this edition of
dotGo he's also acted as MC for the entire day, interviewing the speakers after
each session.

In his talk *Constant time*, Dave accompanied the attendees throughout the
discovery of some variables - he analysed for example some of the "sentinel
errors" that we use everyday - that should probably, by design, be immutable. In
these scenarios a `const` would guarantee that the behaviour of your software
won't change in case someone decided to redefine the value of a sentinel error
to `nil`, being able to bypass, for example, some `if err == rsa.ErrVerification
{`. In some cases it could make sense to define a type alias for a string that
implements the error interface, and use it as a `const` making sure that it
cannot be altered in any way.

> Hashtag **#zerotrust**

### Multi modules repositories ([Jean de Klerk](https://twitter.com/jadekler))
[slides coming soon]

Jean, after a brief and very clear introduction to Go modules, and how they
relate to the most common and basic use case of "one module per project", showed
us how a "one module" project could potentially evolve by promoting its own
subpackages into self contained Go modules, and how this affects the versioning
of each one of them. In addition to this approach, he also gave some hints on
how to solve possible shortcomings of tagging a module in the wrong way.

Jean also explained how modules will allow circular dependencies, as opposed to
what has been so far.

> Hashtag **#byebyemaster**

### Get Going with WebAssembly ([Johan Brandhorst](https://twitter.com/JohanBrandhorst))
[[slides]](https://talks.godoc.org/github.com/johanbrandhorst/presentations/wasm/wasm.slide#1)

Another familiar face from London Gophers on the dotGo stage, this time Johan
after a quick introduction to WebAssembly and TinyGo showed how the two things
could work well with each other: first speaker of the day to run a live coding
session on stage, after a simple example of compiling and consuming a wasm
binary, he moved to more complex examples and demonstrated how TinyGo could
massively reduce the footprint of the file, from MB to KB. He also briefly
explained what the limitation in TinyGo are right now, and encouraged the
participation to the Gophers Slack channels `#webassembly` and `#tinygo`.

> Hashtag **#wecangoanywhere**

### Tuning Go GC Parameters ([Bryan Boreham](https://twitter.com/bboreham))
[slides coming soon]

Go, as opposed to Java/JVM, doesn't offer many options to tune the Garbage
Collector. In fact it only offers one, opportunely named `GOGC`. This variable
can be set to the value `off` or to a number, by default `100`: this default
value means that the GC will allow the heap to grow up to 100% the current value
before kicking in and collecting all the unreferenced objects. In his talk,
Brian showed in which context it could be useful to tune this value, depending
on the specific scenario we are dealing with.

He added a nice recap table at the end of the slides, which I currently cannot
find!

> Hashtag **#keepitclean**

### Generate and render 3D mesh with Go ([Ellen Körbes](https://twitter.com/ellenkorbes))

Ok, this was the talk with the most shocking opening and the funniest closing
I've seen. Probably ever.

The first slide was this 👇

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="pt" dir="ltr"><a
href="https://twitter.com/ellenkorbes?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@ellenkorbes</a>
destruiu tudo. 😍😍<br><br>Amazing talk! <a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/dotGo?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#dotGo</a>
<a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/GoLang?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#GoLang</a>
<a href="https://t.co/1fwXUq6hub">pic.twitter.com/1fwXUq6hub</a></p>&mdash; Luis
Vieira (@xild) <a
href="https://twitter.com/xild/status/1110206368869507074?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

The reason for this introduction was - partially - to explain where the main
idea came from, which is the need to be able to 3D print a [vaginal
dilator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaginal_dilator), but I must admit that
it was like watching a movie where literally anything could happen. After the
formulation of the problem, they explained the process behind the implementation
of the solution (apparently partially solved with JS), after the epic:

> “I’m not sticking JavaScript inside my body”

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">“I’m not
sticking JavaScript inside my body” 😂😂 the <a
href="https://twitter.com/dotGoEu?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@dotGoEu</a> talk by <a
href="https://twitter.com/ellenkorbes?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@ellenkorbes</a> was
hilarious in every aspect! Great job!</p>&mdash; Ivan Daniluk (@idanyliuk) <a
href="https://twitter.com/idanyliuk/status/1110221659515031554?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Their talk was the second one with live coding on stage, and step by step they
showed the possibilities unlocked by some Go libraries for 2D/3D modelling and
rendering, starting with the example of a Gopher, moving on to the dilator model,
and closing - amongst the most spontaneous laughter of the day - with the mesh of
the two.

Irreverent and fun, Ellen managed to bring the audience along a journey that
goes way beyond the technical aspects of a programming language in a beautiful
mesh of code and life. 👌

> Hashtag **#nojs**

### Shattered Mirror: An Introduction to Reflect and Unsafe in Go ([James Bowes](https://twitter.com/jrbowes))

In his talk James explained how the implementation of a workflow in Go led his
team to develop a solution that made use of the `reflect` package, and the
shortcomings that they encountered along the way. In doing so, he also dived
into the `unsafe` package explaining how the two interact with each other.

> Hashtag **#safetyfirst**

---

I unfortunately missed the last two talks, but [Jessie
Frazelle](https://twitter.com/jessfraz) and [Marcel van
Lohuizen](https://github.com/mpvl) due to the risk of missing my last train back
home, so if anyone wants to contribute, please do so by opening a PR on [this
repo](https://github.com/thoeni/hugo-website/tree/master/site/content/post/dotgo-2019.md).

Equally, if any speaker wants to ask for some changes or amends on anything from
this post, feel free to contact me and I'll be happy to help. 

---

# Summary

This was my second dotGo, and I'm already looking forward to the [next
edition](https://2020.dotgo.eu/), on March 30th, 2020!

A final thank you to the **organisers** of the conference - we all know how
stressful this can be - and to the **speakers** who performed bringing their
best self on stage. Thanks to the **sponsors** who made this possible and, last
but not least, to **everyone** who showed up, some from the other side of the
city, some from the other side of the world. It's been a pleasure spending this
day with you all, and I look forward to crossing paths with you again.

Until then, farewell, and don't `panic()`!